[KOGITO-7284] - [KSW-Guides] Deploying on Minikube (#32)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/cloud/deploying-on-minikube.adoc

.Prerequisites

* Serverless Application ready to use.
** Please follow this xref:cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.adoc[guide] to learn how to build the Application Container using your Serverless Application or the example provided.
* Minikube is installed.
** kubectl command line tool, if you don't have it installed, Minikube handles it for you.
* Knative CLI, link:{kn_cli_url}[kn].
* Optionally, link:{quarkus_cli_url}[Quarkus CLI].

== Preparing the Minikube with Knative

.Prerequisites
* minikube installed and running, link:{minikube_url}/docs/start[start guide].
* kn cli installed, link:{kn_cli_url}/install-kn//[install guide].
* kubectl.

.Procedure
. Check if Minikube is correctly installed, on a terminal type:
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube version
----

. For Knative CLI:
+
[source,shell]
----
kn version
----

. For kubectl CLI:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl version
----

[NOTE]
.kubectl
====
If you don't have it installed, execute the following command to let minikube handle it for you:
[source,shell]
----
alias kubectl="minikube kubectl --"
----
====

> Now, the `kubectl` command should be available.

Reviewer: Maybe adding this sentence in the Note above?

=== Installing Knative on Minikube
.Procedure
. Install and configure Knative on Minikube
+

> Knative CLI offers a plugin called `quickstart` that will configure everything that is needed for you, to install it follow this link:{kn_cli_quickstart_plugin_url}[steps].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Knative CLI offers a plugin called `quickstart` that will configure everything needed. To to install it follow these link:{kn_cli_quickstart_plugin_url}[steps].
```

+
With the plugin configured, execute:
+
[source,shell]
----
kn quickstart minikube
----
+

> NOTE: To install everything manually, there is this cool link:{knative_on_minikube_step_by_step_url}[post] from Red Hat Developers blog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: To install everything manually, there is this link:{knative_on_minikube_step_by_step_url}[post] from the Red Hat Developers blog that guides you through the process.
```

+
To open the Minikube WebConsole on the `knative` profile, use the following command
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube dashboard --profile knative
----
The command above will open the Kubernetes Management Console on your browser, if that does not open, copy the `url` that was returned.

> 

Reviewer: What about adding a note that every command must be done with --profile knative from now on? Maybe even clarifying that the quickstart adds the knative profile to your minikube installation.

Author: maybe the second options is better, because users might want to copy and past these commands.
Will add a small note about the profile that will be created.

> == Deploying a Serverless Application on Minikube

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Deploying a Serverless Workflow Application on Minikube
```

> At this point, is expected that you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, it is expected that you:
```

* Followed the previous steps to install Minikube and Knative.
* Have the CLI tools properly installed.

> * Have a Serverless Application Container already built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Have a Serverless Workflow Application Container already built.
```

[IMPORTANT]
.Configure Docker to use the in-cluster Docker daemon
====
With Minikube, you can share your local registry with it, to do this execute this command:

[source,shell]
----
eval $(minikube -p minikube docker-env --profile knative
----

Note that, if the Application Container was built before configuring it, you might be required to build again to make the image available onthe Minikube Docker.

Be sure to use the following system property when building native container images using Minikube's Docker Daemon:
[source,shell]
----
-Dquarkus.native.remote-container-build=true
----

Note that, to make Knative able to fetch images from Minikube's Docker daemon you might be required to tag the images with some one of these registry options:
----

> - ko.local

Author: @davidesalerno I think it is juse a registry name, since everything is local, it doesn't matter the name of it.

- dev.local
----
To do this use the `-Dquarkus.container-image.registry=some_of_the_values_above`. For more information please visit this link:{knative_issue_url}[link].
Another important thing to remember is that, you might need to set the `imagePullPolicy` to `Never` or `IfNotPresent` otherwise Minikube will try to pull it from a remote registry, this behavior can be avoided by tagging the image with some domains listed above.
====

> For this tutorial we will use the Application used on the xref:cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.adoc[Building Serverless Workflow Images using Quarkus CLI] guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, we will use the Application built on the xref:cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.adoc[Building Serverless Workflow Images using Quarkus CLI] guide.
```

=== Preparing the environment

> Before start the procedure to install de Serverless Application, make sure you have started the `minikube tunnel` pointing to the `knative` profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before starting the procedure to install de Workflow Serverless Application, make sure you have started the `minikube tunnel` pointing to the `knative` profile.
```

Author: Workflow Serverless?

Reviewer: lol

.Procedure
. Start the Minikube tunnel using Knative profile
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube tunnel --profile knative
----
+

> NOTE: The tunnel command will start in a loop, it must be running during all this guide.

Reviewer: Please add a note that this command may require the user's password. It happened to me before. You start the command, think it's ready, and there's this tiny message saying "password" that you won't notice quickly.

Author: It happens only on Mac and Windows, right?

. Tunnel Output example
+
[source,shell]
----
Status:
	machine: knative
	pid: 124859
	route: 10.96.0.0/12 -> 192.168.58.2
	minikube: Running
	services: [kourier]
    errors:
		minikube: no errors
		router: no errors
		loadbalancer emulator: no errors
----

Now with all the prerequisites in place, we can go ahead and deploy our Serverless Workflow Application on Minikube.

First, let's create a new namespace and switch to that context.

.Procedure
. Create the `serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus` namespace
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl create namespace serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus
----

. Set the context to the newly created namespace:
+
[source,shell]
----

> kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus

Reviewer: THIS IS GOLD

----
+

> Now on, all the commands issued against Minikube, will use this namespace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From now on, all the commands issued against Minikube will use this namespace
```

> From now on, all the commands issued against Minikube will use this namespace

Author: ```suggestion
From now on, all the commands issued against Minikube will use this namespace.
```

+
[NOTE]
====
To check the current namespace, the following command can be used.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl config view --minify -o jsonpath='{..namespace}'
----
====

> Let's proceed with the installation of our Serverless Application using the container generated in the xref:cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.adoc[Building Serverless Workflow Images using Quarkus CLI] guide. For this example we will use the `native` image to take advantage of its faster startup. Below you can find two examples, one using the Knative CLI `kn` and another using the `kubectl` command line tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's proceed with the installation of the Serverless Workflow Application using the container generated in the xref:cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.adoc[Building Serverless Workflow Images using Quarkus CLI] guide. For this example, we will use the `native` image to take advantage of its faster startup. Below you can find two examples, one using the Knative CLI `kn` and another using the `kubectl` command-line tool.
```

I would avoid the words "let's", "we", "our", and so on.

[source,shell]
----
Creating service 'hello' in namespace 'serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus':

  0.066s The Route is still working to reflect the latest desired specification.
  0.099s ...
  0.322s Configuration "hello" is waiting for a Revision to become ready.
  4.885s ...
  5.061s Ingress has not yet been reconciled.
  5.322s Waiting for load balancer to be ready
  5.460s Ready to serve.

Service 'hello' created to latest revision 'hello-00001' is available at URL:
http://hello.serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus.10.103.94.37.sslip.io
----

You can now use the url shown on the command output to call the Serverless Workflow:
[source,shell]
----
curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -H 'Accept:application/json' -d '{"workflowdata" : {"name": "John", "language": "English"}}' http://hello.serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus.10.103.94.37.sslip.io/jsongreet
----

As response, you should get something like:
[source,json]
----
{"id":"0f77abce-837e-4bd2-b4f1-a0e5e0265fcb","workflowdata":{"name":"John","language":"English","greeting":"Hello from JSON Workflow, "}}%
----

=== Deploying with Kubectl

You can also use plain Kubernetes objects to deploy Serverless Workflow.

> Instead creating the `knative` 'yaml|json' descriptors, you can leverage on the Quarkus Kubernetes extension and Kogito knative addon to generate that for you. To use this, make sure the following dependencies are present on the Application dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of creating the `knative` 'yaml|json' descriptors, you can leverage the Quarkus Kubernetes extension and Kogito Knative Addon to generate that for you. To use this, ensure the following dependencies are present on the Application dependencies:
```

.Pom.xml
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
  <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-knative-eventing</artifactId>
</dependency>
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-kubernetes</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

.Gradle
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
quarkus-kubernetes 'io.quarkus:quarkus-kubernetes:{quarkus_version}'
quarkus-kubernetes 'org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-knative-eventing:{kogito_version}'

> ----

Reviewer: I think you can use the TAB feature here :p

Author: yes :D

Set the following system properties so the files can be generated:

.System Properties
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
quarkus.kubernetes.deployment-target=knative
quarkus.knative.name=greeting-quarkus-kubectl

> ----

Reviewer: A user might think: "How do I set these properties? In the `application.properties`? In the build command line?"

Author: make sense

    app.quarkus.io/build-timestamp: 2022-06-23 - 23:53:38 +0000
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
  name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
    spec:
      containerConcurrency: 0
      containers:
        - image: dev.local/kogito/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0-native
          livenessProbe:
            failureThreshold: 3
            httpGet:
              path: /q/health/live
              port: null
              scheme: HTTP
            initialDelaySeconds: 0
            periodSeconds: 30
            successThreshold: 1
            timeoutSeconds: 10
          name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
          ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
              name: http1
              protocol: TCP
          readinessProbe:
            failureThreshold: 3
            httpGet:
              path: /q/health/ready
              port: null
              scheme: HTTP
            initialDelaySeconds: 0
            periodSeconds: 30
            successThreshold: 1
            timeoutSeconds: 10
----

> NOTE: There is a small bug on the 'Decorate API' where some system properties are not take effect, for more information please take a look at this link:{https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/23832}[Quarkus issue].

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: There is a small bug on the 'Decorate API' where some system properties are not taking effect, for more information please take a look at this link:{https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/23832}[Quarkus issue].
```

After the file generation, you'll might be required to add the `imagePullPolicy` manually before deploying it.

Deploying using kubectl:
[source,shell]
----
kubectl apply -f target/kubernetes/knative.yml
----

Check if the service was deployed correctly:
[source,shell]
----

> kubectl get services.serving.knative.dev greeting-quarkus-kubectl

Reviewer: alternatively, `kn services get...` I think it's easier this way since we have kn installed.

= Deploying on Minikube
=====================================================
06-22-2022
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Deploying Serverless Application on Minikube
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, kn, kubectl, minikube
:table-caption: Data Set
// links
:minikube_url: https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io
:kn_cli_url: https://knative.dev/docs/install/client/
:kn_cli_quickstart_plugin_url: https://knative.dev/docs/install/quickstart-install/#install-the-knative-cli
:knative_on_minikube_step_by_step_url: https://redhat-developer-demos.github.io/knative-tutorial/knative-tutorial/setup/minikube.html
:knative_issue_url: https://github.com/knative/serving/issues/6101

> This document describes how to deploy a Serverless Application using a local Kubernetes cluster link:{minikube_url}}[Minikube] as well the steps required to get the Knative plataform running. Please make sure to read the Get Started Minikube guide and assure that your machine meets the System Requirement.

Reviewer: Where's the guide link? In the latest link in this paragraph?

Author: which link?

+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl version
----

[NOTE]
.kubectl
====
If you don't have it installed, execute the following command to let minikube handle it for you:
[source,shell]
----
alias kubectl="minikube kubectl --"
----

Now, the `kubectl` command should be available.
====

=== Installing Knative on Minikube
.Procedure
. Install and configure Knative on Minikube
+
Knative CLI offers a plugin called `quickstart` that will configure everything needed. To install it follow these link:{kn_cli_quickstart_plugin_url}[steps].
+
With the plugin configured, execute:
+
[source,shell]
----
kn quickstart minikube
----
+
NOTE: The command above configures a Minikube profile called `knative`, from now on, all minikube commands will use this profile, to list the Minikube available profiles use the following command:
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube profile list
----
+
NOTE: To install everything manually, there is this link:{knative_on_minikube_step_by_step_url}[post] from the Red Hat Developers blog that guides you through the process.
+
To open the Minikube WebConsole on the `knative` profile, use the following command
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube dashboard --profile knative
----

> The command above will open the Kubernetes Management Console on your browser, if that does not open, copy the `url` that was returned.

Reviewer: I think there're too many notes here. 😅

Author: removed one :)

[source,shell]
----
-Dquarkus.native.remote-container-build=true
----

Note that, to make Knative able to fetch images from Minikube's Docker daemon you might be required to tag the images with some one of these registry options:
----
- ko.local
- dev.local
----
To do this use the `-Dquarkus.container-image.registry=some_of_the_values_above`. For more information please visit this link:{knative_issue_url}[link].
Another important thing to remember is that, you might need to set the `imagePullPolicy` to `Never` or `IfNotPresent` otherwise Minikube will try to pull it from a remote registry, this behavior can be avoided by tagging the image with some domains listed above.
====

For this tutorial, we will use the Application built on the xref:cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.adoc[Building Serverless Workflow Images using Quarkus CLI] guide.

=== Preparing the environment

Before start the procedure to install de Serverless Application, make sure you have started the `minikube tunnel` pointing to the `knative` profile.

.Procedure
. Start the Minikube tunnel using Knative profile
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube tunnel --profile knative
----
+

> NOTE: The tunnel command will start in a loop, it must be running during all this guide. +
> On Mac and Windows you might be required to provide the system's user password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[IMPORTANT]
====
The tunnel command will start in a loop. Therefore, it must be running throughout this guide.
On Mac and Windows, you might be required to provide the system's user password.
====
```

    app.quarkus.io/build-timestamp: 2022-06-23 - 23:53:38 +0000
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
  name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
    spec:
      containerConcurrency: 0
      containers:
        - image: dev.local/kogito/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0-native
          livenessProbe:
            failureThreshold: 3
            httpGet:
              path: /q/health/live
              port: null
              scheme: HTTP
            initialDelaySeconds: 0
            periodSeconds: 30
            successThreshold: 1
            timeoutSeconds: 10
          name: greeting-quarkus-kubectl
          ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
              name: http1
              protocol: TCP
          readinessProbe:
            failureThreshold: 3
            httpGet:
              path: /q/health/ready
              port: null
              scheme: HTTP
            initialDelaySeconds: 0
            periodSeconds: 30
            successThreshold: 1
            timeoutSeconds: 10
----

> NOTE: There is a small bug on the 'Decorate API' where some system properties are not taking effect, for more information please take a look at this link:{https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/23832}[Quarkus issue].
> After the file generation, you'll might be required to add the `imagePullPolicy` manually before deploying it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[WARNING]
====
There is a small bug on the 'Decorate API' where some system properties are not taking effect, for more information please take a look at this link:{https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/23832}[Quarkus issue].
After the file generation, you'll might be required to add the `imagePullPolicy` manually before deploying it.
====
```

* kn cli installed, link:{kn_cli_url}/install-kn//[install guide].
* kubectl.

.Procedure
. Check if Minikube is correctly installed, on a terminal type:
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube version
----

. For Knative CLI:
+
[source,shell]
----
kn version
----

. For kubectl CLI:
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl version
----

[NOTE]
.kubectl
====
If you don't have it installed, execute the following command to let minikube handle it for you:
[source,shell]
----
alias kubectl="minikube kubectl --"
----

Now, the `kubectl` command should be available.
====

=== Installing Knative on Minikube
.Procedure
. Install and configure Knative on Minikube
+
Knative CLI offers a plugin called `quickstart` that will configure everything needed. To install it follow these link:{kn_cli_quickstart_plugin_url}[steps].
+
With the plugin configured, execute:
+
[source,shell]
----
kn quickstart minikube
----
+
The command above configures a Minikube profile called `knative`, from now on, all minikube commands will use this profile, to list the Minikube available profiles use the following command:
+
[source,shell]
----
minikube profile list
----
+

> NOTE: To install everything manually, there is this link:{knative_on_minikube_step_by_step_url}[post] from the Red Hat Developers blog that guides you through the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
To install everything manually, there is this link:{knative_on_minikube_step_by_step_url}[post] from the Red Hat Developers blog that guides you through the process.
====
```

* Serverless Workflow application container is ready.

.Procedure
. In a command terminal, enter the following command to configure Docker to use the in-cluster Docker daemon:
+
--
.Configure Docker to use in-cluster Docker Daemon
[source,shell]
----
eval $(minikube -p minikube docker-env --profile knative
----

When using Minikube, you can share your local registry with the Docker Daemon. 

NOTE: If your Serverless Workflow application container image was built before configuring Docker, then you might need to build the image again so that the image is available on the Minikube Docker.

Ensure that you use the following system property when building native container images that use Minikube Docker Daemon:

.System property to build container images
[source,shell]
----
-Dquarkus.native.remote-container-build=true
----
--

. Use the `-Dquarkus.container-image.registry=some_of_the_values_above` property to enable Knative fetch the container images from Minikube Docker Daemon. 
+
--
You might be required to tag the container images using one of the following registry options:

* `ko.local`
* `dev.local`

> You can also set the `imagePullPolicy` to `Never` or `IfNotPresent`, otherwise Minikube pulls the images from a remote registry.

Author: I think the previous sentence was more clearer.

For more information, see link:{knative_issue_url}[How to use locally built docker image].
--

. To prepare the environment, start the Minikube tunnel using Knative profile:
+
--
.Start Minikube tunnel using Knative profile
[source,shell]
----
minikube tunnel --profile knative
----

> The previous command starts in a loop. Therefore, this command must be running through the deployment process. On Mac and Windows, you might be required to provide the user password.

Reviewer 2: Done, changed the sentence to "The previous command starts in a loop. Therefore, this command must be running throughout the process mentioned in this document. On Mac and Windows, you might be required to provide the user password."

            timeoutSeconds: 10
----

> You can find the following generated files in `target/kubernetes` directory:

Reviewer 2: Done, changed to "You can find the previous content in the generated files in the `target/kubernetes` directory:"

[source,shell]
----
kubectl apply -f target/kubernetes/knative.yml
----
--

. Verify if the Serverless Workflow application is deployed correctly using the following command:
+
--
[tabs]
====
On kubectl::
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl get services.serving.knative.dev greeting-quarkus-kubectl
----
On Knative CLI::
+
[source,shell]
----
kn service list
----
====

.Example output
[source,shell]
----
NAME                       URL                                                                                          LATESTCREATED                    LATESTREADY                      READY   REASON
greeting-quarkus-kubectl   http://greeting-quarkus-kubectl.serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus.10.103.94.37.sslip.io   greeting-quarkus-kubectl-00001   greeting-quarkus-kubectl-00001   True
----
--

. Access the Serverless Workflow application using the listed URL in the output. 
+
--
.Access Serverless Workflow application
[source,shell]
----
curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -H 'Accept:application/json' -d '{"workflowdata" : {"name": "John", "language": "English"}}' http://greeting-quarkus-kubectl.serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus.10.103.94.37.sslip.io/jsongreet
----
--

> // TODO write after we get around the problem described here:

Author: This issue was fixed on Quarkus 2.10.2.Final
I'll update this section.

[[proc-deploy-sw-application-quarkus-cli]]
=== Deploying your Serverless Workflow application using Quarkus CLI

You can use the link:{quarkus_cli_url}[Quarkus CLI] to abstract all of the complexities mentioned in the previous sections and deploy your Serverless Workflow application once the build completes. 

.Prerequisites
* Serverless Workflow application is installed.
* Quarkus CLI is installed. For more information, see link:{quarkus_cli_url}[Building Quarkus Apps with Quarkus command line interface (CLI)].

.Procedure
. To deploy your Serverless Workflow application using Quarkus CLI, set the following system properties in `application.properties` file:
+
--
.Required system properties
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.knative.name=greeting-quarkus-cli <1>
quarkus.kubernetes.deploy=true <2>
quarkus.container-image.push=false <3>
----

<1> - Property for the Knative resource name
<2> - Property to set whether or not deploy on an active Kubernetes cluster
<3> - Property to whether or not push images when using Minikube's remove Docker daemon to avoid image validation

[IMPORTANT]
====

> This functionality works with Quarkus {quarkus_version} or later. For more information, see

Author: The specific bug that was preventing us to was fixed on 2.10.2.Final, thus it needs to be hardcoded.

> This functionality works with Quarkus {quarkus_version} or later. For more information, see

Author: The specific bug that was preventing us to was fixed on 2.10.2.Final, thus it needs to be hardcoded.

Reviewer 2: Done
